CHAPTER XXIII.

TRAFALGAR.--THE DEATH OF NELSON.

OCTOBER 19-21, 1805. AGE, 47.


Contrary to the general policy that for many years had governed the
naval undertakings of France and Spain, the combined fleets put to sea
on the 19th of October, 1805, with the fixed purpose of daring the
hazard of battle, which they could scarcely expect to avoid. They
numbered thirty-three ships-of-the-line, eighteen French and fifteen
Spanish, and were accompanied by five frigates and two brigs, all of
which were French. This great force in its aggregate was one. There
were not two separate entities, a French fleet and a Spanish fleet,
acting in concert, as is often the case in alliances. Whatever the
administrative arrangements, for cruising and for battle the vessels
of the two nations were blended in a single mass, at the head of which
was the French admiral, just as the general direction of the naval
campaign was in the hands of the French Emperor alone. The
commander-in-chief was Vice-Admiral Villeneuve, the same that Nelson
recently had pursued to the West Indies and back to Europe. The
commander of the Spanish contingent, Vice-Admiral Gravina, was less
his colleague than his subordinate. There were also flying in the
combined fleet the flags of four junior admirals, two French and two
Spanish, and the broad pendants of several commodores.

In the allied force there were four three-decked ships, of from one
hundred to one hundred and thirty guns, all Spanish, of which one,
the "Santísima Trinidad," was the largest vessel then afloat. Among
Nelson's twenty-seven there were seven three-deckers, of ninety-eight
to one hundred guns; but in the lower rates the British were at a
disadvantage, having but one eighty-gun ship and three sixty-fours,
whereas the allies had six of the former and only one of the latter.
All the other vessels of the line-of-battle were seventy-fours, the
normal medium type, upon which the experience of most navies of that
day had fixed, as best fitted for the general purposes of fleet
warfare. Where more tonnage and heavier batteries were put into single
ships, it was simply for the purpose of reinforcing the critical
points of an order of battle; an aim that could not be as effectively
attained by the combination of two ships, under two captains.

As Nelson said in his celebrated order, so large a body as
thirty-three heavy vessels is not easily handled, even at sea; and
leaving port with them is an operation yet more difficult.
Consequently, the movement which began soon after daylight on the 19th
was not completed that day. Owing to the falling of the wind, only
twelve ships got fairly clear of the bay, outside of which they lay
becalmed. The following morning the attempt was resumed, and by two or
three o'clock in the afternoon of the 20th the whole combined fleet
was united, and standing with a fresh southwest wind to the northward
and westward, to gain room to windward for entering the Straits.

As has been said, the movement that Blackwood recognized at 7 A.M. of
the 19th was communicated to the admiral at half-past nine. According
to his announced plan, to cut the enemy off from the Mediterranean, he
at once made signal for a General Chase to the southeast,--towards
Cape Spartel,--and the fleet moved off in that direction with a light
southerly wind. At noon Nelson sat down in his cabin to begin his last
letter to Lady Hamilton. The words then written he signed, as though
conscious that no opportunity to continue might offer; nor is it
difficult to trace that some such thought was then uppermost in his
mind, and sought expression in the tenderness of farewell. The
following day, however, he added a few lines, in which the dominant
note was fear that the enemy might again elude him, by returning into
port; an apprehension that expelled the previous haunting sense of
finality. There he laid down the pen, never again to address her
directly. The letter, thus abruptly closed by death, was found open
and unsigned upon his desk after the battle.

    Victory, October 19th, 1805, Noon. CADIZ, E.S.E., 16 Leagues.

    MY DEAREST BELOVED EMMA, the dear friend of my bosom. The signal
    has been made that the Enemy's Combined Fleet are coming out of
    Port. We have very little wind, so that I have no hopes of
    seeing them before to-morrow. May the God of Battles crown my
    endeavours with success; at all events, I will take care that my
    name shall ever be most dear to you and Horatia, both of whom I
    love as much as my own life. And as my last writing before the
    Battle will be to you, so I hope in God that I shall live to
    finish my letter after the Battle. May Heaven bless you prays
    your

    NELSON AND BRONTE.


    October 20th.

    In the morning, we were close to the Mouth of the Straits, but
    the wind had not come far enough to the Westward to allow the
    Combined Fleets to weather the Shoals off Trafalgar; but they
    were counted as far as forty Sail of Ships of War, which I
    suppose to be thirty-four of the Line, and six Frigates. A group
    of them was seen off the Lighthouse of Cadiz this morning, but
    it blows so very fresh and thick weather, that I rather believe
    they will go into the Harbour before night. May God Almighty
    give us success over these fellows, and enable us to get a
    Peace.

He wrote the same day to his daughter, addressing the letter to Miss
Horatia Nelson Thompson,[132] by which name she had hitherto been
known. In the Codicil to his Will, signed on the morning of the 21st,
a few hours before the battle, he called her his adopted daughter, and
desired that she would in future use the name of Nelson only.

    Victory, October 19th, 1805.

    MY DEAREST ANGEL,--I was made happy by the pleasure of receiving
    your letter of September 19th, and I rejoice to hear that you
    are so very good a girl, and love my dear Lady Hamilton, who
    most dearly loves you. Give her a kiss for me. The Combined
    Fleets of the Enemy are now reported to be coming out of Cadiz;
    and therefore I answer your letter, my dearest Horatia, to mark
    to you that you are ever uppermost in my thoughts. I shall be
    sure of your prayers for my safety, conquest, and speedy return
    to dear Merton, and our dearest good Lady Hamilton. Be a good
    girl, mind what Miss Connor says to you. Receive, my dearest
    Horatia, the affectionate parental blessing of your Father,


    NELSON AND BRONTE.

The 20th of October opened with fresh breezes from south-southwest and
heavy rains. At daybreak the British fleet was near the Straits'
mouth, between Capes Trafalgar and Spartel, unable to see anything,
but certain that, with the existing winds, the enemy could not have
anticipated it there. Blackwood's frigates, out of sight to the
northward, were dogging the path of the allies, of whose general
position they were certain, although the thick weather hid them from
observation. At 7 A.M. the frigate "Phoebe" signalled to Nelson that
the enemy bore north. With the wind as it was, and considering the
position of the land, they must be standing to the northwest, so that
the British fleet wore and steered the same course, keeping parallel
to the enemy and spreading lookouts in their direction. Soon after
noon, the weather clearing, Blackwood saw the combined fleets where he
believed them to be, under low sail, and so close that the "Euryalus"
went about immediately. At 1 P.M. he left the squadron in temporary
charge of a junior captain, and with his own ship kept away south to
speak the admiral. At two he sighted the main body, and at 3.20 was
near enough to send the telegraphic message, "The enemy appears
determined to push to the westward." "That," wrote Nelson in his
diary, "they shall _not_ do, if in the power of Nelson and Bronté to
prevent them," and he telegraphed back, "I rely upon your keeping
sight of the enemy." The frigates and lookout ships, he noted in his
journal, had so far discharged their duties most admirably, informing
him promptly of all the hostile movements; he was justified therefore
in the confidence that they would do as well in the night now
approaching.

While Blackwood was communicating, Nelson himself was much of the time
on the "Victory's" poop. Seeing there a number of midshipmen
assembled, he observed to them, "This day or to-morrow will be a
fortunate one for you, young gentlemen," alluding to their prospect of
promotion after a successful battle. The same day at dinner, he said
to some of the company, "To-morrow I will do that which will give you
younger gentlemen something to talk and think about for the rest of
your lives, but I shall not live to know about it myself;" and he
added that he expected to capture twenty to twenty-two of the hostile
fleet.[133] It may be inferred from this remark that by the dinner
hour, between three and five, he had become satisfied that the enemy
either would not, or could not, return into port, according to the
fear he had expressed to Lady Hamilton, and that a battle therefore
was certain. The letter to her, from its mention of the weather as
thick, must have been written in the forenoon. His expectation that
the morrow would prove the decisive day was reinforced by one of those
prepossessions for coincidences, half jesting, half serious, which are
natural to men, but fall too far short of conviction to be called
superstitious. On the 21st of October, 1757, his uncle Maurice
Suckling had commanded one of three ships-of-the-line which had beaten
off a superior force. Nelson had several times said to Captain Hardy
and Dr. Scott, "The 21st will be our day;" and on the morning of the
battle, when the prediction was approaching fulfilment, he again
remarked that the 21st of October was the happiest day in the year for
his family; but he mentioned no reason other than that just given.

The main bodies of the contending navies did not come in sight of each
other during the 20th; the British lookout frigates, between the two,
and three or four miles from the allied line, could see their own
fleet only from the masthead. At about 2 P.M., soon after the weather
cleared, the wind shifted to west-northwest, taking the ships aback.
After filling their sails again to the new wind, as this was now fair
for their approach to the Straits' mouth, the combined fleets wore,
and headed to the southward. The British remaining on the same tack as
before,--the port,--stood to the northward until 8 P.M., when they
also wore to the southwest; but this interval of steering in nearly
opposite directions changed the relative bearings. At midnight, by the
log of Blackwood's frigates, the enemy stretched along the eastern
horizon, while the British bore southwest; the space between the two
being ten miles. The "Euryalus," three miles from the allies, saw the
loom of the lights of her own fleet. Still fearful lest the view of
his ships should shake the enemy's purpose, Nelson was careful not to
lessen this distance; the more so because the British, having the
wind, could attack when they pleased, provided the enemy by continuing
to the southward deprived themselves of the power to regain Cadiz. Two
British frigates were directed to keep them in sight during the night,
reporting their movements to two others who were stationed a little
farther from them, whence a chain of line-of-battle ships communicated
with the "Victory." Thus, throughout the dark hours, signal lights and
guns flashed across the waters to Nelson instantaneous information of
every noteworthy occurrence in the hostile order.

Since the morning of the 19th, the weather, fine for some days
previous, had become unsettled, working up for the southwest gale
which wrought so much damage among the victims of the fight. As the
night of the 20th advanced, the wind fell, and at midnight there were
only light westerly breezes, inclining to calm. The same conditions
continued at dawn, and throughout the day of the 21st until after the
battle; but there was also a great swell from the westward, the
precursor of a storm. At 4 A.M. the British fleet again wore, and was
standing northeast when the day broke.

After leaving Cadiz, in order to avoid separations during the night,
or in thick weather, the combined fleets had been disposed in five
columns, a formation whose compactness, though not suited to an
engagement, was less liable to straggling than a single long line, and
brought all parts more directly under the control of the
commander-in-chief at the centre. Of the five, the two to windward, of
six ships each, constituted a reserve, similar to Nelson's proposed
detachment of eight. It was commanded by Admiral Gravina, and was
intended to reinforce such part of the battle as should appear to
require it; an object for which the windward position was of the
utmost moment, as it was for all naval initiative in that day. This
advantage the allies did not have on the morning of Trafalgar. When
Villeneuve, therefore, formed the line of battle, these twelve ships
were at once incorporated with it, taking the lead of their order as
it stood to the southward, with the wind at west-northwest,--a long
column stretching over five miles of sea from end to end.

In a general sense, then, it may be said that, when daylight showed
the enemies to each other, the British fleet was heading to the
northward, and that of the allies to the southward; the latter being
ten or twelve miles east of their opponents. In the far distance, Cape
Trafalgar, from which the battle takes its name, was just visible
against the eastern sky. At twenty minutes before seven Nelson made in
quick succession the signals, "To form the order of sailing,"--which
by his previous instructions was to be the order of battle,--and "To
prepare for battle." Ten minutes later followed the command to "Bear
up," the "Victory" setting the example by at once altering her course
for the enemy. Collingwood did the same, and the ships of the two
divisions fell into the wake of their leaders as best they could, for
the light wind afforded neither the means nor the time for refinements
in manoeuvring. Fourteen ships followed the "Royal Sovereign," which
bore Collingwood's flag, while the remaining twelve gathered in
Nelson's division behind the "Victory."[134] The two columns steered
east, about a mile apart, that of Nelson being to the northward; from
which circumstance, the wind being west-northwest, it has been called
commonly the weather line.

Thus, as Ivanhoe, at the instant of encounter in the lists, shifted
his lance from the shield to the casque of the Templar, Nelson, at the
moment of engaging, changed the details of his plan, and substituted
an attack in two columns, simultaneously made, for the charge of
Collingwood's division, in line and in superior numbers, upon the
enemy's flank; to be followed, more or less quickly, according to
indications, by such movement of his own division as might seem
advisable. It will be observed, however, that the order of sailing
remained the order of battle,--probably, although it is not so stated,
the fleet was already thus disposed when the signal was made, needing
only rectification after the derangements incident to darkness,--and
further, that the general direction of attack continued the same,
Collingwood guiding his column upon the enemy's southern flank, while
Nelson pointed a few ships north of their centre. In this way was
preserved the comprehensive aim which underlay the particular
dispositions of his famous order: "The whole impression of the British
fleet must be to overpower from two or three ships ahead of their
commander-in-chief, supposed to be in the Centre, to the Rear of their
fleet." The northern flank of the allies--ten or a dozen ships--was
consequently left unengaged, unless by their own initiative they came
promptly into action; which, it may be added, they did not do until
after the battle was decided.

When the development of the British movement was recognized by
Villeneuve, he saw that fighting was inevitable; and, wishing to keep
Cadiz, then twenty miles to the northward and eastward, under his lee,
he ordered the combined fleets to wear together.[135] The scanty wind
which embarrassed the British impeded this manoeuvre also, so that it
was not completed till near ten o'clock. Nelson, however, noted its
beginning at seven, and with grave concern; for not only would it put
the allies nearer their port, as it was intended to do, but it would
cause vessels crippled in the action to find to leeward of them,
during the gale which he foresaw, the dangerous shoals off Trafalgar
instead of the open refuge of the Straits. The appreciation of the
peril thus entailed led him to make a signal for all the ships to be
prepared to anchor after the battle, for it was not to be hoped that
the spars of many of them would be in a condition to bear sail. The
result of the allied movement was to invert their order. Their ships,
which had been steering south, now all headed north; the van became
the rear; Gravina, who had been leading the column, was in the rear
ship; and it was upon this rear, but still the southern flank of the
hostile array, that the weight of Collingwood's attack was to fall.

Soon after daylight Nelson, who, according to his custom, was already
up and dressed, had gone on deck. He wore as usual his admiral's frock
coat, on the left breast of which were stitched the stars of four
different Orders that he always bore. It was noticed that he did not
wear his sword at Trafalgar, although it lay ready for him on the
cabin table; and it is supposed he forgot to call for it, as this was
the only instance in which he was known not to carry it when engaged.
At about six o'clock he summoned Captain Blackwood on board the
"Victory." This officer had had a hard fag during the past forty-eight
hours, dogging the enemy's movements through darkness and mist; but
that task was over, and his ambition now was to get command of one of
two seventy-fours, whose captains had gone home with Calder to give
evidence at his trial. "My signal just made on board the Victory," he
wrote to his wife. "I hope to order me to a vacant line-of-battle
ship." Nelson's purpose, however, as far as stated by Blackwood, was
simply to thank him for the successful efforts of the past two days,
and to have him by his side till the flagship came under fire, in
order to receive final and precise instructions, as the situation
developed, for the conduct of the frigates during and after the
battle. To Blackwood's congratulations upon the approach of the moment
that he had, to use his own word, panted for, he replied: "I mean
to-day to bleed the captains of the frigates, as I shall keep you on
board to the very last moment."

Blackwood found him in good but very calm spirits, preoccupied with
the movements of the allies, and the probable results of his own plan
of attack. He frequently asked, "What would you consider a victory?"
Blackwood answered: "Considering the handsome way in which the battle
is offered by the enemy, their apparent determination for a fair trial
of strength, and the proximity of the land, I think if fourteen ships
are captured, it will be a glorious result." Nelson's constant reply
was that he would not be satisfied with anything short of twenty. He
admitted, however, that the nearness of the land might make it
difficult to preserve the prizes, and he was emphatic in directing
that, if the shattered enemies had any chance of returning to Cadiz,
the frigates were to be actively employed in destroying them, and were
not to be diverted from that single aim in order to save either ships
or men. Annihilation, he repeated, was his aim, and nothing short of
it; and he must have regretted the absence of the six of the line in
the Mediterranean, imperative as that had been. Word had been sent for
them to Gibraltar by Blackwood the moment the enemy moved, but they
were still away with the convoy.

Blackwood, being a great personal friend of the admiral, took the
liberty, after exchanging greetings, of submitting to him the
expediency of shifting his flag to the "Euryalus," and conducting the
battle from her. Nelson made no reply, but immediately ordered more
sail to be made upon the "Victory." Finding himself foiled in this,
Blackwood then made a direct request for the command of one of the
two vacant seventy-fours. This would give him a chance to share in
the fight, which in a frigate he probably would not have, but it would
also displace the first lieutenant of the ship from the position to
which he had succeeded temporarily. Nelson replied instantly, "No,
Blackwood, it is those men's birthright, and they shall have it."[136]
The incident shows vividly the lively sympathy and sense of justice
which ever distinguished Nelson; for it must have pained him to deny a
request so consonant to his own temper, coming from one whom he had
long known and valued, both as a friend and as an officer, and of
whose recent service such orders would have been a graceful and
appropriate acknowledgment. It may be desirable to explain to
unprofessional readers what was the claim of the lieutenants which
Nelson refused to ignore. The efficiency of the ships for the coming
day's work was due to them scarcely less than to the absent captains,
and if they survived the battle, having been in command through it,
they would reap not only the honor but also their confirmation in the
rank of post-captain, through having exercised it in actual battle.
This succession the admiral aptly called their birthright.

Nelson availed himself of Blackwood's presence to have him, together
with Hardy, witness his signature to a paper, in which he bequeathed
Lady Hamilton and the child Horatia to the care of the nation, and
which consequently has been styled a Codicil to his Will. Unless
Blackwood's memory a few years later was at fault, in stating that his
signal was made at six o'clock,[137] it is likely enough that this
early summons was for the special purpose of giving formal
completeness, by the attestation of two of his closest friends, to a
private duty which was the last to engage Nelson's attention and
affections; for, in addition to the date, the place and hour of his
writing are fixed by the words, "In sight of the Combined Fleets of
France and Spain, distant about ten miles." This was the common
estimate of the relative positions, made by the British fleet at large
at daybreak, and coincides fairly well with the inferences to be
drawn, from the slow rate of speed at which the wind permitted the
British to advance, and from the hour the conflict began. Nor was
there time, nor convenient room, for further delay. A freshening
breeze might readily have brought the fleet into action in a couple of
hours, and it is the custom in preparing for battle--the signal for
which was made at 6.40--to remove most of the conveniences, and
arrangements for privacy, from the living spaces of the officers;
partly to provide against their destruction, chiefly to clear away all
impediments to fighting the guns, and to moving about the ship. In the
case of the admiral, of course, much might be postponed to the last
moment, but in fact his cabin was cleared of fixtures immediately
after he went on the poop in the early morning; for it is distinctly
mentioned that while there he gave particular directions in the
matter, and enjoined great care in handling the portrait of Lady
Hamilton, saying, "Take care of my guardian angel."

It seems, therefore, probable that this so-called Codicil was written
in the quiet minutes of the morning, while the fleet was forming its
order of sailing and bearing up for the enemy, but before the
admiral's cabin was cleared for battle. In it Nelson first recounted,
briefly but specifically, "the eminent services of Emma Hamilton" to
the state, on two occasions, as believed by himself to have been
rendered. Into the actuality of these services it is not necessary
here to inquire;[138] it is sufficient to say that Nelson's knowledge
of them could not have been at first hand, and that the credence he
unquestionably gave to them must have depended upon the evidence of
others,--probably of Lady Hamilton herself, in whom he felt, and
always expressed, the most unbounded confidence. "Could I have
rewarded these services," the paper concludes, "I would not now call
upon my Country; but as that has not been in my power, I leave Emma
Lady Hamilton, therefore, a legacy to my King and Country, that they
will give her an ample provision to maintain her rank in life. I also
leave to the beneficence of my Country my adopted daughter, Horatia
Nelson Thompson; and I desire she will use in future the name of
Nelson only. These are the only favours I ask of my King and Country
at this moment when I am going to fight their battle. May God bless my
King and Country, and all those who I hold dear. My relations it is
needless to mention: they will of course be amply provided for."

At seven o'clock Nelson had returned from the poop to the cabin, for
at that hour was made in his private journal the last entry of
occurrences,--"At seven the combined fleets wearing in succession."
Here it seems likely that he laid down the pen, for, when he was found
writing again, some hours later, it was to complete the long record of
experiences and of duties, with words that summed up, in fit and most
touching expression, the self-devotion of a life already entering the
shadow of death.

Between eight and nine o'clock the other frigate commanders came on
board the "Victory;" aides-de-camp, as it were, waiting to the last
moment to receive such orders as might require more extensive wording,
or precise explanation, than is supplied by the sententious phrases of
the signal-book. Blackwood himself, a captain of long standing and of
tried ability, was in fact intrusted contingently with no small share
of the power and discretion of the commander-in-chief. "He not only
gave me command of all the frigates, but he also gave me a latitude,
seldom or ever given, that of making any use I pleased of his name, in
ordering any of the sternmost line-of-battle ships to do what struck
me as best." While thus waiting, the captains accompanied the admiral
in an inspection which he made of the decks and batteries of the
flagship. He addressed the crew at their several quarters, cautioned
them against firing a single shot without being sure of their object,
and to the officers he expressed himself as highly satisfied with the
arrangements made.

Meanwhile the two fleets were forming, as best they could with the
scanty breeze, the order in which each meant to meet the shock of
battle. The British could not range themselves in regular columns
without loss of time that was not to be thrown away. They advanced
rather in two elongated groups, all under full sail, even to
studding-sails on both sides, the place of each ship being determined
chiefly by her speed, or, perhaps, by some fortuitous advantage of
position when the movement began. The great point was to get the heads
of the columns into action as soon as possible, to break up the
enemy's order. That done, those which followed could be trusted to
complete the business on the general lines prescribed by Nelson.
Collingwood's ship, the "Royal Sovereign," being but a few days out
from home, and freshly coppered, easily took the lead in her own
division. After her came the "Belleisle," also a recent arrival off
Cadiz, but an old Mediterranean cruiser which had accompanied Nelson
in the recent chase to the West Indies. Upon these two ships, as upon
the heads of all columns, fell the weight of destruction from the
enemy's resistance.

The "Victory," always a fast ship, had likewise little difficulty in
keeping her place at the front. Blackwood, having failed to get Nelson
on board his own frigate, and realizing the exposure inseparable from
the position of leader, ventured, at about half-past nine, when still
six miles from the enemy, to urge that one or two ships should be
permitted to precede the "Victory." Nelson gave a conditional
assent--"Let them go," if they can. The "Téméraire," a three-decker,
being close behind, was hailed to go ahead, and endeavored to do so;
but at the same moment the admiral gave an indication of how little
disposed he was to yield either time or position. The lee lower
studding-sail happening to be badly set, the lieutenant of the
forecastle had it taken in, meaning to reset it; which Nelson
observing, ran forward and rated him severely for delaying the ship's
progress. Anything much less useful than a lee lower studding-sail is
hard to imagine, but by this time the admiral was getting very
restive. "About ten o'clock," says Blackwood, "Lord Nelson's anxiety
to close with the enemy became very apparent: he frequently remarked
that they put a good face upon it; but always quickly added: 'I'll
give them such a dressing as they never had before.'"

Seeing that the "Téméraire" could not pass the "Victory" in time to
lead into the hostile order, unless the flagship gave way, Blackwood,
feeling perhaps that he might wear out his own privilege, told Hardy
he ought to say to the admiral that, unless the "Victory" shortened
sail, the other ships could not get into place; but Hardy naturally
demurred. In any event, it was not just the sort of proposition that
the captain of the ship would wish to make, and it was very doubtful
how Nelson might take it. This the latter soon showed, however; for,
as the "Téméraire" painfully crawled up, and her bows doubled on the
"Victory's" quarter, he hailed her, and speaking as he always did with
a slight nasal intonation, said: "I'll thank you, Captain Harvey, to
keep in your proper station, which is astern of the Victory." The same
concern for the admiral's personal safety led the assembled officers
to comment anxiously upon the conspicuous mark offered by his blaze of
decorations, knowing as they did that the enemy's ships swarmed with
soldiers, that among them were many sharpshooters, and that the action
would be close. None, however, liked to approach him with the
suggestion that he should take any precaution. At length the surgeon,
whose painful duty it was a few hours later to watch over the sad
fulfilment of his apprehensions, said that he would run the risk of
his Lordship's displeasure; but before he could find a fitting
opportunity to speak, a shot flew over the "Victory," and the admiral
directed all not stationed on deck to go to their quarters. No remark
therefore was made; but it is more likely that Nelson would have
resented the warning than that he would have heeded it.

The French and Spanish fleets, being neither a homogeneous nor a
well-exercised mass, experienced even greater difficulty than the
British in forming their array; and the matter was to them of more
consequence, for, as the defensive has an advantage in the careful
preparations he may make, so, if he fail to accomplish them, he has
little to compensate for the loss of the initiative, which he has
yielded his opponent. The formation at which they aimed, the customary
order of battle in that day, was a long, straight, single column,
presenting from end to end an unbroken succession of batteries, close
to one another and clear towards the foe, so that all the ships should
sweep with their guns the sea over which, nearly at right angles, the
hostile columns were advancing. Instead of this, embarrassed by both
lack of wind and lack of skill, their manoeuvres resulted in a curved
line, concave to the enemy's approach; the horns of the crescent thus
formed being nearer to the latter. Collingwood noted that this
disposition facilitated a convergent fire upon the assailants, the
heads of whose columns were bearing down on the allied centre; it does
not seem to have been remarked that the two horns, or wings, being to
windward of the centre, also had it more in their power to support the
latter--a consideration of very great importance. Neither of these
advantages, however, was due to contrivance. The order of the combined
fleets was the result merely of an unsuccessful effort to assume the
usual line of battle. The ships distributed along the crescent lay
irregularly, sometimes two and three abreast, masking each other's
fire. On the other hand, even this irregularity had some
compensations, for a British vessel, attempting to pass through at
such a place, fell at once into a swarm of enemies. From horn to horn
was about five miles. Owing to the lightness of the breeze, the allies
carried a good deal of sail, a departure from the usual battle
practice. This was necessary in order to enable them to keep their
places at all, but it also had the effect of bringing them
continually, though very gradually, nearer to Cadiz. Seeing this,
Nelson signalled to Collingwood, "I intend to pass through the van of
the enemy's line, to prevent him from getting into Cadiz," and the
course of the "Victory," for this purpose, was changed a little to the
northward.

After this, towards eleven o'clock, Nelson went below to the cabin. It
was his habit, when an engagement was expected, to have all the
bulkheads[139] upon the fighting decks taken down, and those of his
own apartments doubtless had been removed at least as soon as the
enemy's sailing was signalled; but it was possible to obtain some
degree of privacy by hanging screens, which could be hurried out of
the way at the last moment. The "Victory" did not come under fire till
12.30, so that at eleven she would yet be three miles or more distant
from the enemy,[140] and screens could still remain. Shortly, after he
entered, the signal-lieutenant, who had been by his side all the
morning, followed him, partly to make an official report, partly to
prefer a personal request. He was the ranking lieutenant on board, but
had not been permitted to exercise the duties of first lieutenant,
because Nelson some time before, to avoid constant changes in that
important station, had ordered that the person then occupying it
should so continue, notwithstanding the seniority of any who might
afterwards join. Now that battle was at hand, the oldest in rank
wished to claim the position, and to gain the reward that it insured
after a victory,--a request natural and not improper, but more suited
for the retirement of the cabin than for the publicity of the deck.

Whatever the original injustice,--or rather hardship,--it is scarcely
likely, remembering the refusal encountered by Blackwood, that Nelson
would have consented now to deprive of his "birthright" the man who so
far had been doing the work; but the petition was never preferred.
Entering the cabin, the officer paused at the threshold, for Nelson
was on his knees writing. The words, the last that he ever penned,
were written in the private diary he habitually kept, in which were
noted observations and reflections upon passing occurrences, mingled
with occasional self-communings. They followed now, without break of
space, or paragraph, upon the last incident recorded--"At seven the
enemy wearing in succession"--and they ran thus:--

"May the Great God, whom I worship, grant to my Country, and for the
benefit of Europe in general, a great and glorious victory; and may no
misconduct in any one tarnish it; and may humanity after victory be
the predominant feature in the British fleet. For myself,
individually, I commit my life to Him who made me, and may His
blessing light upon my endeavours for serving my Country faithfully.
To Him I resign myself and the just cause which is entrusted to me to
defend. Amen. Amen. Amen."

The officer, Lieutenant Pasco, waited quietly till Nelson rose from
his knees, and then made his necessary report; but, although his
future prospects hung upon the wish he had to express, he refrained
with singular delicacy from intruding it upon the preoccupation of
mind evidenced by the attitude in which he had found his commander.
The latter soon afterwards followed him to the poop, where Blackwood
was still awaiting his final instructions. To him Nelson said, "I will
now amuse the fleet with a signal;" and he asked if he did not think
there was one yet wanting. Blackwood replied that the whole fleet
seemed very clearly to understand what they were about, and were vying
with each other to get as near as possible to the leaders of the
columns. Upon this succeeded the celebrated signal, the development of
which to its final wording is a little uncertain. Comparing the
various accounts of witnesses, it seems probably to have been as
follows. Nelson mused for a little while, as one who phrases a thought
in his own mind before uttering it, and then said, "Suppose we
telegraph 'Nelson confides that every man will do his duty.'" In this
form it was the call of the leader to the followers, the personal
appeal of one who trusts to those in whom he trusts, a feeling
particularly characteristic of the speaker, whose strong hold over
others lay above all in the transparent and unswerving faith he showed
in their loyal support; and to arouse it now in full force he used the
watchword "duty," sure that the chord it struck in him would find its
quick response in every man of the same blood. The officer to whom the
remark was made, suggested "England" instead of "Nelson." To the fleet
it could have made no difference,--to them the two names meant the
same thing; but Nelson accepted the change with delight. "Mr. Pasco,"
he called to the signal officer, "I wish to say to the fleet, 'England
confides that every man will do his duty;'" and he added, "You must be
quick, for I have one more to make, which is for close action." This
remark shows that the columns, and particularly Collingwood's ship,
were already nearing the enemy. Pasco answered, "If your Lordship will
permit me to substitute 'expects' for 'confides,' it will be sooner
completed, because 'expects' is in the vocabulary,[141] and 'confides'
must be spelt." Nelson replied hastily, but apparently satisfied,
"That will do, Pasco, make it directly;" but the slightly mandatory
"expects" is less representative of the author of this renowned
sentence than the cordial and sympathetic "confides." It is "Allez,"
rather than "Allons;" yet even so, become now the voice of the distant
motherland, it carries with it the shade of reverence, as well as of
affection, which patriotism exacts.

It is said that Collingwood, frequently testy, and at the moment
preoccupied with the approaching collision with the Spanish
three-decker he had marked for his opponent, exclaimed impatiently
when the first number went aloft, "I wish Nelson would stop
signalling, as we know well enough what we have to do." But the two
life-long friends, who were not again to look each other in the face,
soon passed to other thoughts, such as men gladly recall when death
has parted them. When the whole signal was reported to him, and cheers
resounded along the lines, Collingwood cordially expressed his own
satisfaction. A few moments later, just at noon, the French ship
"Fougueux," the second astern of the "Santa Ana," for which the "Royal
Sovereign" was steering, fired at the latter the first gun of the
battle. As by a common impulse the ships of all the nations engaged
hoisted their colors, and the admirals their flags,--a courteous and
chivalrous salute preceding the mortal encounter. For ten minutes the
"Royal Sovereign" advanced in silence, the one centre of the hostile
fire, upon which were fixed all eyes, as yet without danger of their
own to distract. As she drew near the two ships between which she
intended to pass, Nelson exclaimed admiringly, "See how that noble
fellow Collingwood carries his ship into action." At about the same
instant Collingwood was saying to his flag-captain, "Rotherham, what
would Nelson give to be here!"

These things being done, Nelson said to Blackwood, "Now I can do no
more. We must trust to the great Disposer of all events, and to the
justice of our cause. I thank God for this great opportunity of doing
my duty." When his last signal had been acknowledged by a few ships in
the van, the admiral directed Pasco to make that for close action, and
to keep it up. This was accordingly hoisted on board the flagship,
where it was flying still as she disappeared into the smoke of the
battle, and so remained till shot away. The "Victory" was about two
miles from the "Royal Sovereign" when the latter, at ten minutes past
twelve, broke through the allied order, and she had still a mile and a
half to go before she herself could reach it. At twenty minutes past
twelve Villeneuve's flagship, the "Bucentaure," of eighty guns, fired
a shot at her, to try the range. It fell short. A few minutes later a
second was fired, which dropped alongside. The distance then was a
mile and a quarter. Two or three followed in rapid succession and
passed over the "Victory." Nelson then turned to Blackwood, and
directed him and Captain Prowse of the "Sirius" to return to their
ships, but in so doing to pass along the column and tell the captains
he depended upon their exertions to get into action as quickly as
possible. He then bade them again to go away. Blackwood, who was
standing by him at the forward end of the poop, took his hand, and
said, "I trust, my Lord, that on my return to the Victory, which will
be as soon as possible, I shall find your Lordship well and in
possession of twenty prizes." Nelson replied, "God bless you,
Blackwood, I shall never speak to you again."

The "Victory" was all the time advancing, the feeble breeze urging her
progress, which was helped also by her lurching through the heavy
following swell that prevailed. Before Blackwood could leave her, a
shot passed through the main-topgallantsail, and the rent proclaimed
to the eager eyes of the foes that the ship was fairly under their
guns. Thereupon everything about the "Bucentaure," some seven or eight
ships, at least, opened upon this single enemy, as the allied rear and
centre had upon the "Royal Sovereign;" for it was imperative to stop
her way, if possible, or at least to deaden it, and so to delay as
long as might be the moment when she could bring her broadside to bear
effectively. During the forty minutes that followed, the "Victory" was
an unresisting target to her enemies, and her speed, slow enough at
the first, decreased continually as the hail of shot riddled the
sails, or stripped them from the yards. Every studding-sail boom was
shot away close to the yard arms, and this light canvas, invaluable in
so faint a wind, fell helplessly into the water. During these trying
moments, Mr. Scott, the admiral's public secretary, was struck by a
round shot while talking with Captain Hardy, and instantly killed.
Those standing by sought to remove the body without drawing Nelson's
attention to the loss of one so closely associated with him; but the
admiral had noticed the fall. "Is that poor Scott," he said, "who is
gone?" The clerk who took the dead man's place was killed a few
moments later by the wind of a ball, though his person was untouched.

The "Victory" continuing to forge slowly ahead, despite her injuries,
and pointing evidently for the flagship of the hostile
commander-in-chief, the ships round the latter, to use James's
striking phrase, now "closed like a forest." The nearer the British
vessel drew, the better necessarily became the enemies' aim. Just as
she got within about five hundred yards--quarter of a mile--from the
"Bucentaure's" beam, the mizzen topmast was shot away. At the same
time the wheel was hit and shattered, so that the ship had to be
steered from below, a matter that soon became of little importance. A
couple of minutes more, eight marines were carried off by a single
projectile, while standing drawn up on the poop, whereupon Nelson
ordered the survivors to be dispersed about the deck. Presently a shot
coming in through the ship's side ranged aft on the quarter-deck
towards the admiral and Captain Hardy, between whom it passed. On its
way it struck the fore-brace bitts--a heavy block of timber--carrying
thence a shower of splinters, one of which bruised Hardy's foot. The
two officers, who were walking together, stopped, and looked
inquiringly at each other. Seeing that no harm was done, Nelson
smiled, but said, "This is too warm work, Hardy, to last long." He
then praised the cool resolution of the seamen around him, compelled
to endure this murderous fire without present reply. He had never, he
said, seen better conduct. Twenty men had so far been killed and
thirty wounded, with not a shot fired from their own guns.

Still the ship closed the "Bucentaure." It had been Nelson's purpose
and desire to make her his special antagonist, because of Villeneuve's
flag; but to do so required room for the "Victory" to turn under the
French vessel's stern, and to come up alongside. As she drew near,
Hardy, scanning the hostile array, saw three ships crowded together
behind and beyond the "Bucentaure." He reported to Nelson that he
could go close under her stern, but could not round-to alongside, nor
pass through the line, without running on board one of these. The
admiral replied, "I cannot help it, it does not signify which we run
on board of. Go on board which you please: take your choice." At one
o'clock the bows of the "Victory" crossed the wake of the
"Bucentaure," by whose stern she passed within thirty feet, the
projecting yard arms grazing the enemy's rigging. One after another,
as they bore, the double-shotted guns tore through the woodwork of the
French ship, the smoke, driven back, filling the lower decks of the
"Victory," while persons on the upper deck, including Nelson himself,
were covered with the dust which rose in clouds from the wreck. From
the relative positions of the two vessels, the shot ranged from end to
end of the "Bucentaure," and the injury was tremendous. Twenty guns
were at once dismounted, and the loss by that single discharge was
estimated, by the French, at four hundred men. Leaving the further
care of the enemy's flagship to her followers, secure that they would
give due heed to the admiral's order, that "every effort must be made
to capture the hostile commander-in-chief," the "Victory" put her helm
up, inclining to the right, and ran on board a French seventy-four,
the "Redoutable," whose guns, as well as those of the French
"Neptune," had been busily playing upon her hitherto. At 1.10 she lay
along the port side of the "Redoutable," the two ships falling off
with their heads to the eastward, and moving slowly before the wind to
the east-southeast.

In the duel which ensued between these two, in which Nelson fell, the
disparity, so far as weight of battery was concerned, was all against
the French ship; but the latter, while greatly overmatched at the
guns, much the greater part of which were below deck, was markedly
superior to her antagonist in small-arm fire on the upper deck, and
especially aloft, where she had many musketeers stationed. Nelson
himself was averse to the employment of men in that position, thinking
the danger of fire greater than the gain, but the result on this day
was fatal to very many of the "Victory's" men as well as to himself.
As the ship's place in the battle was fixed for the moment, nothing
now remained to be done, except for the crews to ply their weapons
till the end was reached. The admiral and the captain, their parts of
direction and guidance being finished, walked back and forth together
on the quarter-deck, on the side farthest from the "Redoutable," where
there was a clear space of a little over twenty feet in length, fore
and aft, from the wheel to the hatch ladder leading down to the cabin.
The mizzen-top of the "Redoutable," garnished with sharpshooters, was
about fifty feet above them. Fifteen minutes after the vessels came
together, as the two officers were walking forward, and had nearly
reached the usual place of turning, Nelson, who was on Hardy's left,
suddenly faced left about. Hardy, after taking a step farther, turned
also, and saw the admiral in the act of falling--on his knees, with
his left hand touching the deck; then, the arm giving way, he fell on
his left side. It was in the exact spot where Scott, the secretary,
had been killed an hour before. To Hardy's natural exclamation that he
hoped he was not badly hurt, he replied, "They have done for me at
last;" and when the expression of hope was repeated, he said again,
"Yes, my back-bone is shot through." "I felt it break my back," he
told the surgeon, a few minutes later. The ball had struck him on the
left shoulder, on the forward part of the epaulette, piercing the
lung, where it severed a large artery, and then passed through the
spine from left to right, lodging finally in the muscles of the back.
Although there was more than one mortal injury, the immediate and
merciful cause of his speedy death was the internal bleeding from the
artery. Within a few moments of his wounding some forty officers and
men were cut down by the same murderous fire from the tops of the
enemy. Indeed so stripped of men was the upper deck of the "Victory"
that the French made a movement to board, which was repulsed, though
with heavy loss.

The stricken hero was at once carried below, himself covering his face
and the decorations of his coat with his handkerchief, that the sight
of their loss might not affect the ship's company at this critical
instant. The cockpit was already cumbered with the wounded and dying,
but the handkerchief falling from his face, the surgeon recognized
him, and came at once to him. "You can do nothing for me, Beatty," he
said; "I have but a short time to live." The surgeon also uttered the
involuntary exclamation of encouragement, which rises inevitably to
the lips at such a moment; but a short examination, and the sufferer's
statement of his sensations, especially the gushing of blood within
the breast, which was vividly felt, convinced him that there was
indeed no hope. "Doctor, I am gone," he said to the Rev. Mr. Scott,
the chaplain, who knelt beside him; and then added in a low voice, "I
have to leave Lady Hamilton, and my adopted daughter Horatia, as a
legacy to my Country."

After the necessary examination had been made, nothing further could
be done, nor was attempted, than to obtain the utmost possible relief
from suffering. Dr. Scott and the purser of the "Victory" sustained
the bed under his shoulders, raising him into a semi-recumbent
posture, the only one that was supportable to him, and fanned him;
while others gave him the cooling drink--lemonade--which he
continually demanded. Those about did not speak to him, except when
addressed; but the chaplain, to whom Nelson frequently said, "Pray for
me, Doctor," ejaculated with him short prayers from time to time. The
agony of mortal pain wrung from him repeated utterance, though no
unmanly complaint; and his thoughts dwelt more upon home and the
battle than upon his own suffering and approaching death. His mind
remained clear until he became speechless, about fifteen minutes
before he passed away, and he took frequent notice of what occurred
near him, as well as of sounds on deck.

The hour that succeeded his wounding was the decisive one of the
fight; not that the issue admitted of much doubt, after once Nelson's
plans had received fulfilment, and the battle joined,--unless the
delinquent van of the allies had acted promptly,--but in those moments
the work was done which was thenceforth, for the enemy, beyond repair.
Overhead, therefore, the strife went on incessantly, the seamen
toiling steadily at their guns, and cheering repeatedly. Near the
admiral lay Lieutenant Pasco, severely but not fatally wounded. At one
burst of hurrahs, Nelson asked eagerly what it was about; and Pasco
replying that another ship had struck, he expressed his satisfaction.
Soon he became very anxious for further and more exact information of
the course of the battle, and about the safety of Captain Hardy, upon
whom now was devolved such guidance as the fleet, until the action was
over, must continue to receive from the flagship of the
commander-in-chief. In accordance with his wishes many messages were
sent to Hardy to come to him, but for some time it was not possible
for that officer to leave the deck. During this period, up to between
half-past two and three, the ships of the two British divisions, that
followed the leaders, were breaking successively into the enemy's
order, and carrying out with intelligent precision the broad outlines
of Nelson's instructions. The heads of the columns had dashed
themselves to pieces, like a forlorn hope, against the overpowering
number of foes which opposed their passage--an analysis of the returns
shows that upon the four ships which led, the "Victory" and
"Téméraire," the "Royal Sovereign" and "Belleisle," fell one-third of
the entire loss in a fleet of twenty-seven sail. But they had forced
their way through, and by the sacrifice of themselves had shattered
and pulverized the local resistance, destroyed the coherence of the
hostile line, and opened the road for the successful action of their
followers. With the appearance of the latter upon the scene, succeeded
shortly by the approach of the allied van, though too late and in
disorder, began what may be called the second and final phase of the
battle.

While such things were happening the deck could not be left by Hardy,
who, for the time being, was commander-in-chief as well as captain.
Shortly after Nelson fell, the "Téméraire" had run on board the
"Redoutable" on the other side, and the French "Fougueux" upon the
"Téméraire," so that for a few minutes the four ships were fast
together, in the heat of the fight. About quarter past two, the
"Victory" was shoved clear, and lay with her head to the northward,
though scarcely with steerage way. The three others remained in
contact with their heads to the southward. While this _mêlée_ was in
progress, the French flagship "Bucentaure" surrendered, at five
minutes past two; but, before hauling down the flag, Villeneuve made a
signal to his recreant van,--"The ships that are not engaged, take
positions which will bring them most rapidly under fire." Thus
summoned, the ten vessels which constituted the van began to go about,
as they should have done before; and, although retarded by the slack
wind, they had got their heads to the southward by half-past two. Five
stood to leeward of the line of battle, but five to windward. The
latter would pass not far to the westward of the "Victory," and to
meet this fresh attack demanded the captain's further care, and
postponed his going to the death-bed of his chief. The latter had
become very agitated at the delay, thinking that Hardy might be dead
and the news kept from him. "Will nobody bring Hardy to me?" he
frequently exclaimed. "He must be killed; he is surely destroyed." At
last a midshipman came down with the message that "circumstances
respecting the fleet required the captain's presence on deck, but that
he would take the first favourable moment to visit his Lordship."
Nelson, hearing the voice, asked who it was that spoke. The lad,
Bulkeley, who later in the day was wounded also, was the son of a
former shipmate in the far back days of the San Juan expedition, and
the dying admiral charged the lad with a remembrance to his father.

Two ships of Nelson's column, as yet not engaged,--the "Spartiate" and
the "Minotaur,"--were then just reaching the scene. Being in the
extreme rear, the lightness of the breeze had so far delayed them.
Arriving thus opportunely, they hauled to the wind so as to interpose
between the "Victory" and the approaching van of the allies. Covered
now by two wholly fresh ships, the captain felt at liberty to quit the
deck, in accordance with Nelson's desire. The two tried friends--Hardy
had been everywhere with him since the day of St. Vincent, and was
faithful enough to speak to Lady Hamilton more freely than she
liked--shook hands affectionately. "Well, Hardy," said Nelson, "how
goes the battle? How goes the day with us?" "Very well, my Lord,"
replied Hardy. "We have got twelve or fourteen of the enemy's ships in
our possession, but five of their van have tacked, and show an
intention of bearing down upon the Victory. I have therefore called
two or three of our fresh ships round us, and have no doubt of giving
them a drubbing." "I hope none of _our_ ships have struck, Hardy."
"No, my Lord," was the answer, "there is no fear of that." Nelson then
said, "I am a dead man, Hardy. I am going fast: it will be all over
with me soon. Come nearer to me. Pray let my dear Lady Hamilton have
my hair, and all other things belonging to me." Hardy observed that he
hoped Mr. Beatty could yet hold out some prospect of life. "Oh no!"
replied Nelson; "it is impossible. My back is shot through. Beatty
will tell you so." Hardy then returned to the deck, shaking hands
again before parting.

Nelson now desired the surgeons to leave him to the attendants, as one
for whom nothing could be done, and to give their professional care
where it would be of some avail. In a few moments he recalled the
chief surgeon, and said, "I forgot to tell you that all power of
motion and feeling below my breast are gone; and _you_ very well
_know_ I can live but a short time." From the emphasis he placed on
his words, the surgeon saw he was thinking of a case of spinal injury
to a seaman some months before, which had proved mortal after many
days' suffering; yet it would seem that, despite the conviction that
rested on his mind, the love of life, and of all it meant to him, yet
clung to the hope that possibly there might be a reprieve. "One would
like to live a little longer," he murmured; and added, "What would
become of poor Lady Hamilton if she knew my situation!" "Beatty," he
said again, "_you know_ I am gone." "My Lord," replied the surgeon,
with a noble and courteous simplicity, "unhappily for our country,
nothing can be done for you;" and he turned away to conceal the
emotion which he could not at once control. "I know it," said Nelson.
"I feel something rising in my breast," putting his hand on his left
side, "which tells me I am gone. God be praised, I have done my duty."
To this latter thought he continually recurred.

At about three o'clock, the five ships of the enemy's van, passing
within gunshot to windward,[142] opened fire upon the British ships
and their prizes. The "Victory" with her consorts replied. "Oh,
Victory! Victory!" cried the sufferer, "how you distract my poor
brain!" and after a pause added, "How dear life is to all men!" This
distant exchange of shots was ineffectual, except to kill or wound a
few more people, but while it continued Hardy had to be on deck, for
the flag of the commander-in-chief still vested his authority in that
ship. During this period an officer was sent to Collingwood to inform
him of the admiral's condition, and to bear a personal message of
farewell from the latter; but Nelson had no idea of transferring any
portion of his duty until he parted with his life also.

A short hour elapsed between Hardy's leaving the cockpit and his
returning to it, which brings the time to four o'clock. Strength had
ebbed fast meanwhile, and the end was now very near; but Nelson was
still conscious. The friends again shook hands, and the captain,
before releasing his grasp, congratulated the dying hero upon the
brilliancy of the victory. It was complete, he said. How many were
captured, it was impossible to see, but he was certain fourteen or
fifteen. The exact number proved to be eighteen. "That is well," said
Nelson, but added, faithful to his exhaustive ideas of sufficiency, "I
bargained for twenty." Then he exclaimed, "_Anchor_, Hardy, _anchor_!"
Hardy felt the embarrassment of issuing orders now that Collingwood
knew that his chief was in the very arms of death; but Nelson was
clearly within his rights. "I suppose, my Lord," said the captain,
"Admiral Collingwood will now take upon himself the direction of
affairs." "Not while I live, I hope, Hardy," cried Nelson, and for a
moment endeavored, ineffectually, to raise himself from the bed. "No.
Do _you_ anchor, Hardy." Captain Hardy then said, "Shall we make the
signal, Sir?" "Yes," answered the admiral, "for if I live, I'll
anchor." These words he repeated several times, even after Hardy had
left him, and the energy of his manner showed that for the moment the
sense of duty and of responsibility had triumphed over his increasing
weakness.

Reaction of course followed, and he told Hardy he felt that in a few
minutes he should be no more. "Don't throw me overboard," he added;
"you know what to do." Hardy having given assurance that these wishes
should be attended to, Nelson then said, "Take care of my dear Lady
Hamilton, Hardy: take care of poor Lady Hamilton. Kiss me, Hardy." The
captain knelt down and kissed his cheek. "Now I am satisfied. Thank
God, I have done my duty." Hardy rose and stood looking silently at
him for an instant or two, then knelt down again and kissed his
forehead. "Who is that?" asked Nelson. The captain answered, "It is
Hardy;" to which his Lordship replied, "God bless you, Hardy!" The
latter then returned to the quarter-deck, having passed about eight
minutes in this final interview.

Nelson now desired his steward, who was in attendance throughout, to
turn him on his right side. "I wish I had not left the deck," he
murmured; "for I shall soon be gone." Thenceforth he sank rapidly; his
breathing became oppressed and his voice faint. To Dr. Scott he said,
"Doctor, I have _not_ been a _great_ sinner," and after a short pause,
"_Remember_, that I leave Lady Hamilton and my daughter Horatia as a
legacy to my country--never forget Horatia." This injunction, with
remembrances to Lady Hamilton and the child, he frequently repeated;
and he charged Scott to see Mr. Rose, and tell him--but here pain
interrupted his utterance, and after an interval he simply said, "Mr.
Rose will remember," alluding to a letter which he had written him,
but which as yet could not have been received. His thirst now
increased; and he called for "drink, drink," "fan, fan," and "rub,
rub," addressing himself in this last case to Dr. Scott, who had been
rubbing his breast with his hand, by which some relief was given.
These words he spoke in a very rapid manner, which rendered his
articulation difficult; but he every now and then, with evident
increase of pain, made a greater effort, and said distinctly, "Thank
God, I have done my duty." This he repeated at intervals as long as
the power of speech remained. The last words caught by Dr. Scott, who
was bending closely over him, were, "God and my Country."

Fifteen minutes after Hardy left him for the second time, the admiral
became speechless; and when this had continued five minutes, the
surgeon, who was busied among the other wounded, was summoned again.
He found him upon the verge of dissolution, the hands cold and the
pulse gone; but upon laying his hand upon his forehead, Nelson opened
his eyes, looked up, and then closed them forever. Five minutes later
he was dead. The passing was so quiet that Dr. Scott, still rubbing
his breast, did not perceive it, until the surgeon announced that all
was over. It was half-past four o'clock, just three hours after the
fatal wound was received. Not till an hour later did the last of the
eighteen prizes strike, and firing cease altogether; but the
substantial results were known to Nelson before consciousness left
him. To quote the rugged words of the "Victory's" log, "Partial firing
continued until 4.30, when a victory having been reported to the Right
Honourable Lord Viscount Nelson, K.B., he died of his wound."

Of the five ships of the allied van which passed to windward of the
"Victory," one was cut off and captured by the "Minotaur" and
"Spartiate." The other four continued on the wind to the southwest,
and escaped to sea. By the surrender of Villeneuve the chief command
of the combined fleets remained with the Spanish admiral Gravina. The
latter, at quarter before five, fifteen minutes after Nelson breathed
his last, retreated upon Cadiz, making signal for the vessels which
had not struck to rally round his flag. Ten other ships, five French
and five Spanish,--in all eleven sail-of-the-line,--made good their
escape into the port.

"Before sunset," wrote an eye-witness on board the "Belleisle," "all
firing had ceased. The view of the fleet at this period was highly
interesting, and would have formed a beautiful subject for a painter.
Just under the setting rays were five or six dismantled prizes; on one
hand lay the Victory with part of our fleet and prizes, and on the
left hand the Royal Sovereign and a similar cluster of ships. To the
northward, the remnant of the combined fleets was making for Cadiz.
The Achille, with the tricoloured ensign still displayed, had burnt to
the water's edge about a mile from us, and our tenders and boats were
using every effort to save the brave fellows who had so gloriously
defended her; but only two hundred and fifty were rescued, and she
blew up with a tremendous explosion."

There, surrounded by the companions of his triumph, and by the
trophies of his prowess, we leave our hero with his glory. Sharer of
our mortal weakness, he has bequeathed to us a type of single-minded
self-devotion that can never perish. As his funeral anthem proclaimed,
while a nation mourned, "His body is buried in peace, but his Name
liveth for evermore." Wars may cease, but the need for heroism shall
not depart from the earth, while man remains man and evil exists to be
redressed. Wherever danger has to be faced or duty to be done, at cost
to self, men will draw inspiration from the name and deeds of Nelson.

Happy he who lives to finish all his task. The words, "I have done my
duty," sealed the closed book of Nelson's story with a truth broader
and deeper than he himself could suspect. His duty was done, and its
fruit perfected. Other men have died in the hour of victory, but for
no other has victory so singular and so signal graced the fulfilment
and ending of a great life's work. "Finis coronat opus" has of no man
been more true than of Nelson. There were, indeed, consequences
momentous and stupendous yet to flow from the decisive supremacy of
Great Britain's sea-power, the establishment of which, beyond all
question or competition, was Nelson's great achievement; but his part
was done when Trafalgar was fought. The coincidence of his death with
the moment of completed success has impressed upon that superb battle
a stamp of finality, an immortality of fame, which even its own
grandeur scarcely could have insured. He needed, and he left, no
successor. To use again St. Vincent's words, "There is but one
Nelson."

FOOTNOTES:

[132] The name Thompson was spelled by Nelson indifferently with or without
the "p", which, as Nicolas observes, confirms the belief that it was
fictitious. The fact is singular; for, from a chance remark of his, it
appears that he meant it to be Thomson. (Morrison, Letter No. 569.)

[133] The author is indebted for this anecdote to Mr. Edgar Goble, of
Fareham, Hants, whose father, Thomas Goble, then secretary to Captain
Hardy, was present at the table.

[134] One sixty-four, the "Africa," had separated to the northward during
the night, and joined in the battle by passing alone along the enemy's
line, much of the time under fire. She belonged, therefore, to Nelson's
column, and cooperated with it during the day.

[135] Nelson in his journal wrote: "The enemy wearing _in succession_." As
the allies' order was reversed, however, it is evident that he meant merely
that the ships wore one after the other, from rear to van, but in their
respective stations, each waiting till the one astern had, to use the old
phrase, "marked her manoeuvre,"--a precaution intended to prevent
collisions, though it necessarily extended the line.

[136] The author is indebted for these incidents to Admiral Sir W.R. Mends,
G.C.B., who received them from the second baronet, Sir Henry M. Blackwood,
when serving with him as first lieutenant.

[137] The "Euryalus's" log gives eight o'clock as the hour of the captain's
going on board the "Victory;" but Blackwood not only says six, but also
mentions that his stay on board lasted five and a half hours, which gives
about the same time for going on board. The other frigate captains did not
go till eight. Blackwood, as the senior, might need a fuller and longer
continued interview, because the general direction of the frigate squadron
would be in his hands; or Nelson might particularly desire the presence of
a close professional friend, the captains of the ships-of-the-line having
their hands now full of preparations.

[138] The question of Lady Hamilton's services on the occasions mentioned
by Nelson, vigorously asserted by herself, has been exhaustively discussed
by Professor John Knox Laughton, in the "United Service Magazine" for April
and May, 1889. His conclusions are decisively adverse to her claims.

[139] See _ante_, p. 275.

[140] That is, with a one and a half knot breeze.

[141] The vocabulary of the telegraphic signal book provides certain words
which can be signalled by a single number. Words not in this vocabulary
must be spelled letter by letter,--each letter of the alphabet having its
own number.

[142] That is, to the westward.




