    MEMORANDUM.

    (Secret)

    Victory, off CADIZ, 9th October, 1805.

    Thinking it almost
    impossible to bring a Fleet of forty Sail of the Line into a
    Line of Battle in variable winds, thick weather, and other
    circumstances which must occur, without such a loss of time that
    the opportunity would probably be lost of bringing the Enemy to
    Battle in such a manner as to make the business decisive, I have
    therefore made up my mind to keep the Fleet in that position of
    sailing (with the exception of the First and Second in Command)
    that the Order of Sailing is to be the Order of Battle, placing
    the Fleet in two Lines of sixteen Ships each, with an Advanced
    Squadron of eight of the fastest sailing Two-decked Ships, which
    will always make, if wanted, a Line of twenty-four Sail, on
    whichever Line the Commander-in-Chief may direct.

    The Second in Command
    will, after my intentions are made known to him, have the entire
    direction of his Line to make the attack upon the Enemy, and to
    follow up the blow until they are captured or destroyed.

    If the Enemy's Fleet
    should be seen to windward in Line of Battle, and that the two
    Lines and the Advanced Squadron can fetch them, they will
    probably be so extended that their Van could not succour their
    Rear.

    I should therefore probably make the Second in Command's signal
    to lead through, about their twelfth Ship from their Rear, (or
    wherever he could fetch, if not able to get so far advanced); my
    Line would lead through about their Centre, and the Advanced
    Squadron to cut two or three or four Ships a-head of their
    Centre, so as to ensure getting at their Commander-in-Chief, on
    whom every effort must be made to capture.

    The whole impression of the British Fleet must be to overpower
    from two or three Ships a-head of their Commander-in-Chief
    supposed to be in the Centre, to the Rear of their Fleet. I will
    suppose twenty Sail of the Enemy's Line to be untouched, it must
    be some time before they could perform a manoeuvre to bring
    their force compact to attack any part of the British Fleet
    engaged, or to succour their own Ships, which indeed would be
    impossible without mixing with the Ships engaged.

    Something must be left to chance; nothing is sure in a Sea Fight
    beyond all others. Shot will carry away the masts and yards of
    friends as well as foes; but I look with confidence to a Victory
    before the Van of the Enemy could succour their Rear, and then
    that the British Fleet would most of them be ready to receive
    their twenty Sail of the Line, or to pursue them, should they
    endeavour to make off.

    If the Van of the Enemy tacks, the Captured Ships must run to
    leeward of the British Fleet; if the Enemy wears, the British
    must place themselves between the Enemy and the Captured, and
    disabled British Ships; and should the Enemy close, I have no
    fears as to the result.

    The Second in Command will in
    all possible things direct the movements of his Line, by keeping
    them as compact as the nature of the circumstances will admit.
    Captains are to look to their particular Line as their rallying
    point. But, in case Signals can neither be seen or perfectly
    understood, no Captain can do very wrong if he places his Ship
    alongside that of an Enemy.

    Of the intended attack from to windward, the Enemy in Line of
    Battle ready to receive an attack,

    [Illustration][123]

    The divisions of the
    British Fleet will be brought nearly within gun shot of the
    Enemy's Centre. The signal will most probably then be made for
    the Lee Line to bear up together, to set all their sails, even
    steering sails, in order to get as quickly as possible to the
    Enemy's Line, and to cut through, beginning from the 12 Ship
    from the Enemy's Rear. Some Ships may not get through their
    exact place, but they will always be at hand to assist their
    friends; and if any are thrown round the Rear of the Enemy, they
    will effectually complete the business of twelve Sail of the
    Enemy.

    Should the Enemy wear together, or bear up and sail large, still
    the twelve Ships composing, in the first position, the Enemy's
    Rear, are to be the object of attack of the Lee Line, unless
    otherwise directed from the Commander-in-Chief, which is
    scarcely to be expected, as the entire management of the Lee
    Line, after the intentions of the Commander-in-Chief, is
    signified, is intended to be left to the judgment of the Admiral
    commanding that Line.

    The
    remainder of the Enemy's Fleet, 34 Sail, are to be left to the
    management of the Commander-in-Chief, who will endeavour to take
    care that the movements of the Second in Command are as little
    interrupted as is possible.

    NELSON AND BRONTE.
